feat: add no-unassigned-vars rule (#19618)
eslint/eslint: docs/src/rules/no-unassigned-vars.md

---
title: no-unassigned-vars
rule_type: problem
related_rules:
- prefer-const
- init-declarations
---

> This rule flags `let` or `var` declarations that have no initializer and are never assigned any value, but are read/used in the code. These variables will always be `undefined` and are likely a programmer error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule flags `let` and `var` declarations that have no initializer and are read without first being assigned a value. These variables will always be `undefined` and are likely a programmer error.
```

Reviewer: We should also show an example here. This intro is supposed to describe what the rule does with an example.

Author: The suggested wording would be inaccurate, since the rule is not checking the order of reads and writes, it is specifically checking for the case where there are some reads but there are no writes whatsoever (and no initializer).

> This helps catch misleading patterns where a `let` appears mutable but is effectively constant and never written to.

Reviewer: Let's remove this. I think this wording is confusing and doesn't add anything to the rule description.

## Rule Details

Examples of **incorrect** code for this rule:

::: incorrect

```ts
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let status;
if (status === 'ready') {
  console.log('Ready!');
}

let user;
greet(user);

function test() {
  let error;
  return error || "Unknown error";
}

let options;
const { debug } = options || {};

let flag;
while (!flag) {
  // Do something...
}

let config;
function init() {
  return config?.enabled;
}

// In TypeScript:
let value: number | undefined;
console.log(value);
```

:::

Examples of **correct** code for this rule:

::: correct

```ts
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let message = "hello";
console.log(message);

let user;
user = getUser();
console.log(user.name);

let count;
count = 1;
count++;

// Variable is unused (should be reported by `no-unused-vars` only)
let temp;

let error;
if (somethingWentWrong) {
  error = "Something went wrong";
}
console.log(error);

let item;
for (item of items) {
  process(item);
}

let config;
function setup() {
  config = { debug: true };
}
setup();
console.log(config);

let one = undefined;
if (one === two) {
  // Noop
}

// In TypeScript:
declare let value: number | undefined;

> console.log(value);

Author: Actually it seems that this breaks the highlighting of lint errors in the examples (they are only highlighted in the first code block):

<img width="400" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e5ff9f23-99bf-4641-a807-c949010f4905" />

see deploy preview: https://deploy-preview-19618--docs-eslint.netlify.app/rules/no-unassigned-vars

I believe this is why I originally put all the examples in a single code block.

Given that limitation, what would you prefer to do here? IMO it's nicer if all the errors are highlighted so I would keep it in the same code block, but it's fine this way too.

---
title: no-unassigned-vars
rule_type: problem
related_rules:
- prefer-const
- init-declarations
---

This rule flags `let` or `var` declarations that are never assigned a value but are still read or used in the code. Since these variables will always be `undefined`, their usage is likely a programming mistake.

For example, if you check the value of a `status` variable, but it was never given a value, it will always be `undefined`:

```js
let status;

// ...forgot to assign a value to status...

if (status === 'ready') {
  console.log('Ready!');
}
```

## Rule Details

Examples of **incorrect** code for this rule:

::: incorrect

```js
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let status;
if (status === 'ready') {
  console.log('Ready!');
}

let user;
greet(user);

function test() {
  let error;
  return error || "Unknown error";
}

let options;
const { debug } = options || {};

let flag;
while (!flag) {
  // Do something...
}

let config;
function init() {
  return config?.enabled;
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

:::
```

we need to close this `incorrect` tag first.

> In TypeScript:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In TypeScript:

::: incorrect
```

this way it will highlight the `ts` code as well

```ts
let value: number | undefined;
console.log(value);
```

:::

Examples of **correct** code for this rule:

::: correct

```js
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let message = "hello";
console.log(message);

let user;
user = getUser();
console.log(user.name);

let count;
count = 1;
count++;

// Variable is unused (should be reported by `no-unused-vars` only)
let temp;

let error;
if (somethingWentWrong) {
  error = "Something went wrong";
}
console.log(error);

let item;
for (item of items) {
  process(item);
}

let config;
function setup() {
  config = { debug: true };
}
setup();
console.log(config);

let one = undefined;
if (one === two) {
  // Noop
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

:::
```

Same for `correct` tag also.

> In TypeScript:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In TypeScript:

::: correct
```

---
title: no-unassigned-vars
rule_type: problem
related_rules:

> - prefer-const

Reviewer 3: consider adding `no-unused-vars` to the related rules?

Author: I think I considered that, but since this rule is actually only checking _used_ vars now, I'm not really sure if I can see the argument for it being related?

Happy to change if anyone feels strongly

Reviewer 3: The clear connection in my head as a user is that no-unused-vars flags variables that are written-to-but-not-read and no-unassigned-vars flags variables that are read-but-not-written-to. But your call!

  console.log('Ready!');
}

let user;
greet(user);

function test() {
  let error;
  return error || "Unknown error";
}

let options;
const { debug } = options || {};

let flag;
while (!flag) {
  // Do something...
}

let config;
function init() {
  return config?.enabled;
}
```

:::

In TypeScript:

::: incorrect

```ts
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/
let value: number | undefined;
console.log(value);
```

:::

Examples of **correct** code for this rule:

::: correct

```js
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let message = "hello";
console.log(message);

let user;
user = getUser();
console.log(user.name);

let count;
count = 1;
count++;

// Variable is unused (should be reported by `no-unused-vars` only)
let temp;

let error;
if (somethingWentWrong) {
  error = "Something went wrong";
}
console.log(error);

let item;
for (item of items) {
  process(item);
}

let config;
function setup() {
  config = { debug: true };
}
setup();
console.log(config);

let one = undefined;
if (one === two) {
  // Noop
}
```

:::

In TypeScript:

::: correct

```ts
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/
declare let value: number | undefined;
console.log(value);
```

:::

> 

Reviewer 4: Can we also add the `When Not To Use It` section similar to all other rules?

Author: What would you suggest to put in this section? I think the rule should always be used 😄 

Just looking at an example from `no-unused-vars`:

> **When Not To Use It**
> If you don’t want to be notified about unused variables or function arguments, you can safely turn this rule off.

IMO, this section is not very useful since it simply restates the rule description, but negated.

Reviewer 4: Something like below:

## When Not To Use It

You can disable this rule if your code intentionally uses variables that are declared but never assigned a value before being read. This might be the case in:

- Legacy codebases where uninitialized variables are used as placeholders or flags.
- Code patterns relying on default `undefined` values for control flow, though this is typically discouraged.
- Certain TypeScript use cases where variables are declared with a type and intentionally left unassigned (though using `declare` is preferred).

Author: ok, added this with some modifications:
- "declared but never assigned a value before being read" → "declared and used, but are never assigned a value"
- deleted "relying on default undefined values for control flow" — this use case is fine and is not flagged by this rule assuming the variable actually gets assigned somewhere.

---
title: no-unassigned-vars
rule_type: problem
related_rules:
- init-declarations
- no-unused-vars
- prefer-const
---

This rule flags `let` or `var` declarations that are never assigned a value but are still read or used in the code. Since these variables will always be `undefined`, their usage is likely a programming mistake.

For example, if you check the value of a `status` variable, but it was never given a value, it will always be `undefined`:

```js
let status;

// ...forgot to assign a value to status...

if (status === 'ready') {
  console.log('Ready!');
}
```

## Rule Details

Examples of **incorrect** code for this rule:

::: incorrect

```js
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let status;
if (status === 'ready') {
  console.log('Ready!');
}

let user;
greet(user);

function test() {
  let error;
  return error || "Unknown error";
}

let options;
const { debug } = options || {};

let flag;
while (!flag) {
  // Do something...
}

let config;
function init() {
  return config?.enabled;
}
```

:::

In TypeScript:

::: incorrect

```ts

> /*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/
> let value: number | undefined;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let value: number | undefined;
```

Just to add a blank line after the configuration comment.

console.log(value);
```

:::

Examples of **correct** code for this rule:

::: correct

```js
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let message = "hello";
console.log(message);

let user;
user = getUser();
console.log(user.name);

let count;
count = 1;
count++;

// Variable is unused (should be reported by `no-unused-vars` only)
let temp;

let error;
if (somethingWentWrong) {
  error = "Something went wrong";
}
console.log(error);

let item;
for (item of items) {
  process(item);
}

let config;
function setup() {
  config = { debug: true };
}
setup();
console.log(config);

let one = undefined;
if (one === two) {
  // Noop
}
```

:::

In TypeScript:

::: correct

```ts

> /*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/
> declare let value: number | undefined;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

declare let value: number | undefined;
```

---
title: no-unassigned-vars
rule_type: problem
related_rules:
- prefer-const
- init-declarations
---

> This rule flags `let` or `var` declarations that have no initializer and are never assigned any value, but are read/used in the code. These variables will always be `undefined` and are likely a programmer error.

Reviewer 3: > These variables will always be `undefined` and are likely a programmer error.

Or can throw a [TDZ `ReferenceError`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/let#temporal_dead_zone_tdz)!

Reviewer 5: Yeah, I also don't think it's so relevant to this particular rule because forgetting to set the variable will not cause a TDZ error since it's implicitly initialized to `undefined`.

This helps catch misleading patterns where a `let` appears mutable but is effectively constant and never written to.

## Rule Details

Examples of **incorrect** code for this rule:

::: incorrect

```js
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let status;
if (status === 'ready') {
  console.log('Ready!');
}

let user;
greet(user);

function test() {
  let error;
  return error || "Unknown error";
}

let options;
const { debug } = options || {};

let flag;
while (!flag) {
  // Do something...
}

let config;
function init() {
  return config?.enabled;
}
```

:::

Examples of **correct** code for this rule:

::: correct

```js
/*eslint no-unassigned-vars: "error"*/

let message = "hello";
console.log(message);

let user;
user = getUser();
console.log(user.name);

let count;
count = 1;
count++;

// Variable is unused (should be reported by `no-unused-vars` only)
let temp;

let error;
if (somethingWentWrong) {
  error = "Something went wrong";
}
console.log(error);

let item;
for (item of items) {
  process(item);
}

let config;
function setup() {
  config = { debug: true };
}
setup();
console.log(config);

let one = undefined;
if (one === two) {
  // Noop
}
```

:::

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you add some TypeScript related examples also?
